LeadSpend API V2 Documentation
--------------------

A-1. OVERVIEW
--------------------

The LeadSpend Validation Platform provides real-time and batch validation of email
addresses. The platform is accessible via a RESTful web service as well as an automated
FTP service, as described in Parts B and C of this specification, respectively.

A-2. VALIDITY
--------------------

LeadSpend defines the validity of an email address as follows:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Value</th><th>Description</th></tr>
<tr><td>verified</td><td>Mailbox exists, is reachable, and not known to be illegitimate or disposable.</td></tr>
<tr><td>disposable</td><td>Domain is administered by disposable email provider (e.g. Mailinator).</td></tr>
<tr><td>unreachable</td><td>Domain does not exist or has no reachable mail exchangers (see discussion, below).</td></tr>
<tr><td>illegitimate</td><td>Seed, spamtrap, black hole, technical role account or inactive domain.</td></tr>
<tr><td>undeliverable</td><td>Mailbox does not exist, or mailbox is full, suspended or disabled.</td></tr>
<tr><td>unknown</td><td>We were unable to conclusively verify or invalidate this address.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

A **role** account is an email address that is not associated with a specific person, but rather
with an office, position, group or task. Role accounts can be broadly classified as either
*technical* or *nontechnical*.

- A *technical* role account has a local part such as *postmaster*, *abuse* or *spam*.
Because such accounts should never be mailed, these addresses are classified as **illegitimate**.

- A *nontechnical* role account has a local part such as *sales*, *support*, *info*, *legal*, or
*inquiries*. Whether you choose to accept such addresses depends on your use case,
and may require case-by-case, manual evaluation. For these addresses, the value
of the **role** field will be **true**.

A **full** mailbox is **undeliverable**, and typically indicative of an inactive account.
However, if you would like to accept these, you can identify them by the the existence of the **full**
 field, containing a value of **true**.

An email address is **unreachable** if either no mail exchangers are advertised for its
domain or they all persistently reject or do not reply to inbound connections. While almost
always indicative of a domain which is not used to receive email, transient configuration or
DNS errors on the receiving end may also be at fault.

B-1. WEB SERVICE OVERVIEW
--------------------

The LeadSpend Validation Platform is accessible via a RESTful web service for real-time
validation. API resources are identified by URLs and interacted with using the standard
HTTP methods: GET, PUT, POST and DELETE.

An illustrative example of a real-time query and its result is given in *Section* B-9.

B-2. VERSIONING
--------------------

The client specifies the desired API version in the URL of each request (see *Section* B-5)
so that new versions do not break existing deployments. Whenever the introduction of
compatibility-breaking changes is necessary, a new version number will be allocated, but
this should be relatively infrequent. The most recent two API versions will be supported
at any given time, but only the newest version will be actively maintained.

B-3. SECURITY
--------------------

All API traffic is encrypted via TLS (SSL) and the servers are authenticated via 2048-bit
X.509 digital certificates. Client-side (JavaScript) queries are authorized via the HTTP
Referer (sic) header (*N.B.* in order to prevent theft of service by third parties via header
spoofing, only a limited number of Referer (sic)-authorized queries are accepted per IP
address). Server-side queries are authenticated via an API-key URL parameter.

B-4. AVAILABILITY
--------------------

In order to promote service availability even in the event of a data center-wide disruption,
two API servers are provided, situated in geographically distinct data centers. Requests
may be directed to either server. No appreciable difference in performance or behavior
should be expected. Clients are expected to alternate API servers in the event of
communication failure or persistent errors.

B-5. URL STRUCTURE
--------------------

All resources are exposed according to the following URL structure:

`https://{server}/{version}/path/to/resource`

Required parameters:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Name</th><th>Description</th><th>Value(s)</th></tr>
<tr><td>server</td><td>The server name.</td><td>primary.api.leadspend.com, secondary.api.leadspend.com</td></tr>
<tr><td>version</td><td>The API version.</td><td>v2</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

B-6. STATUS CODES
--------------------

Clients must examine the HTTP status code of server replies before attempting to
interpret their content. The following status codes are specifically defined, but clients
should be prepared to interpret other status codes, such as might be generated by
intermediate proxies or firewalls, as per RFC 2616:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Status code</th><th>Interpretation</th></tr>
<tr><td>200 OK</td><td>The request was well-formed and the reply contains the result.</td></tr>
<tr><td>202 Accepted</td><td>The request was well-formed but the result is not yet available.</td></tr>
<tr><td>400 Bad Request</td><td>The request was malformed and should not be retried without modification. The reply content will contain a description of the error.</td></tr>
<tr><td>401 Unauthorized</td><td>No authorization credentials were supplied, they were invalid, or they were encoded incorrectly. Check your WWW-Authenticate header.</td></tr>
<tr><td>500 Internal Server Error</td><td>An unexpected error occurred. The request may be retried (perhaps with an alternate server), but persistent failures should be reported.</td></tr>
<tr><td>503 Service Unavailable</td><td>The server is temporarily overloaded and not accepting new requests. Requests should temporarily be directed to an alternate server.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

B-7. REPRESENTATIONS
--------------------

The default resource representation format is JSON; however, XML representations can
be requested by specifying application-xml in the Accept header. Clients unable
to modify headers may pass this value via an accept-header URI parameter, instead.

When validating server replies, clients should ensure that all expected fields are present.
However, in order to accommodate intra-version additions to the API, any unexpected
fields must be ignored. Clients must not rely on any undocumented fields.

B-8. REAL-TIME VALIDITY RESOURCE
--------------------

GET is the only method allowed for this resource. Its relative path has the following
structure:

`/validity/{address}?timeout={timeout}`

There are two required parameters:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Name</th><th>Description</th><th>Value</th></tr>
<tr><td>address</td><td>The email address to validate.</td><td>A percent-encoded email address.</td></tr>
<tr><td>timeout</td><td>The timeout, in seconds.</td><td>Integer (truncated to the range [3, 15]).</td></tr>
<tr><td>key</td><td>API key (required unless otherwise stated)</td><td>A randomly generated API key</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The representation (named validity, if XML) will contain the following fields:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Name</th><th>Description</th><th>Value(s)</th></tr>
<tr><td>address</td><td>The email address.</td><td>A string (nominally an email address).</td></tr>
<tr><td>result</td><td>The validation result.</td><td>See Section A-2.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The representation may also contain one or more of the following fields:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Name</th><th>Description</th><th>Value(s)</th></tr>
<tr><td>role</td><td>Is this a nontechnical role account?</td><td>true or not present.</td></tr>
<tr><td>full</td><td>Is the mailbox full?</td><td>true or not present.</td></tr>
<tr><td>timeout</td><td>Was the query's timeout exhausted?</td><td>true or not present.</td></tr>
<tr><td>retry</td><td>You may retry after this many seconds.</td><td>An integer or not present.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Clients will receive a result of unknown for any queries not satisfied within the
timeout period, starting from when the request is received, and ending when it is replied
to, server-side.

Results of unknown or unreachable may occasionally be due to transient issues, such
as DNS errors, mail exchanger misconfiguration, server rate-limiting (for real-time
queries) or even internal errors. When there is any possibility of this being the case, the
result field will be accompanied by a retry field, specifying how many seconds must
be waited before retrying the query, if desired.

B-9. REAL-TIME VALIDITY RESOURCE EXAMPLE
--------------------

To validate fake-address@leadspend.com, the client might GET the resource at:

`https://primary.api.leadspend.com/v2/validity/fake-address@leadspend.com?timeout=5&key={API key}`

and would receive the following representation:

`{ "address": "fake-address@leadspend.com",
 "result": "undeliverable" }`
 
C-1. FTP SERVICE OVERVIEW
--------------------

The LeadSpend Validation Platform is accessible via an FTP service for batch processing.
Special folders (see *Section* C-6) and error-checking (see *Sections* C-7 and C-8) facilitate
robust, fully automated integrations.

C-2. VERSIONING
--------------------

The client specifies the desired service version in the server hostname (see *Section* C-5)
so that new versions do not break existing deployments. Whenever the introduction of
compatibility-breaking changes is necessary, a new version number will be allocated, but
this should be relatively infrequent. The most recent two service versions will be
supported at any given time, but only the newest will be actively maintained.

C-3. SECURITY
--------------------

If the client uses FTPS then traffic is encrypted via TLS (SSL) and the servers
authenticated via 2048-bit X.509 digital certificates. FTP is supported, but is not secure.

No client's files nor folders are visible to nor accessible by any other client.

C-4. AVAILABILITY
--------------------

In order to promote service availability even in the event of data center-wide disruption,
two FTP servers are provided, situated in geographically distinct data centers. Results
will only be available on the server to which the file was submitted. Clients are expected
to alternate FTP servers in the event of persistent network failure.

If an FTP server becomes unreachable while processing a file, the client may resubmit it to
the other server. As long as the file's contents are exactly the same (*N.B.* dissimilar filenames
are fine), clients will not be double-charged for any overlapping queries that result.

C-5. HOSTNAME
--------------------

The hostname of each FTP server conforms to the following structure:

`{version}.{server}`

Required parameters:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Name</th><th>Description</th><th>Value(s)</th></tr>
<tr><td>server</td><td>The server name.</td><td>primary.ftp.leadspend.com, secondary.ftp.leadspend.com</td></tr>
<tr><td>version</td><td>The API version.</td><td>v2</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

C-6. FOLDERS
--------------------

The client has access to the following folders:

<table>
<tbody>
<tr><th>Path</th><th>Description</th></tr>
<tr><td>uploads</td><td>If possible, upload files here then move them to incoming (see Section C-7).</td></tr>
<tr><td>incoming</td><td>Place files here to submit them for validation.</td></tr>
<tr><td>outgoing</td><td>Pick up completed files here.</td></tr>
<tr><td>errors</td><td>Any malformed files placed in incoming are moved here.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The client has the following filesystem permissions and restrictions:

- Cannot create, rename or remove any folders.
- Can only upload files into the uploads and incoming folders.
- Can only move/rename from uploads,and only into incoming or uploads.
- May delete files from any folder.

C-7. UPLOADS
--------------------

Surprisingly, the FTP(S) protocol does not provide any mechanism by which a server can
reliably distinguish a failed upload (and a truncated file) from a successful one. As such,
clients are strongly encouraged to upload files to the uploads folder and then move
them to the incoming folder. Uploading directly to incoming is also allowed, but the
client risks running a truncated file if there is a network interruption.

C-8. INPUT
--------------------

Uploaded files must be RFC 4180-compliant CSVs (*cf.* http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4180 ):

- Commas are used to separate fields.
- DOS/Windows-style newline (CR+LF) are used to terminate records.
- The last record may or may not be terminated.
- Double-quotation marks are used to quote fields.
- Double-quotation marks are used to escape double-quotation marks.
- Fields containing commas, newlines or double-quotation marks must be quoted.
- Otherwise, quoting is optional.

In addition to the above, a header row is required. The email-address column must be
named email (case-insensitive). Additional columns may be included, and will be
preserved in the output, but none of them may be named result, role nor full.
Additional column names may be reserved, in the future.

ASCII-mode FTP converts newline sequences during transfer, so use binary mode!

C-9. OUTPUT
--------------------

Output files will adhere to the same format as used for input, except containing additional
fields named result, role and full (with values as described in *Section* B-8).

To simplify parsing (*e.g.* for direct, MS-SQL bulk import ), *every* field will be quoted.

C-10. AUTOMATION
--------------------

It is helpful to think of the FTP service as a *state machine*: Whichever folder a file is in
reflects its current processing *state*.

Importantly, because a file is only in a single state at any given time, it is not necessary to
poll every folder. Rather, having uploaded a file, one need *only* poll the incoming
folder. When the file is no longer there, one should look at the errors and outgoing
folders to see if the file was malformed or successfully processed, respectively.

If malformed, manual intervention is required&#8212;something is wrong with how the file is
formatted, and re-uploading it will not help. Review *Section* C-8 and ensure you have
included a proper header row, are quoting any special characters (and properly escaping
any quotes), are using the correct line terminators, and are using binary transfer mode.

If successfully processed, the results will remain in the outgoing folder for at least 30
days, after which they may be deleted automatically by the FTP service. It is the client's
responsibility to collect results before this time&#8212;and likewise to delete them, if so desired.

Before acting on the results, the client should always ensure they conform to the expected
format, contain the expected records, and the results are within reasonable bounds.
